README
# Description of the scripts used to analysis the imaging data of the protein isoform library and the follow-up imaging-based examination of the SNX2 mutant constructs. The scripts are separated into three folders.
Folder 1 containing the scripts related to processing the raw image files into single-cell measurements that can be used for quantatitive analysis.
Folder 2 contains the scripts that performs classifier-based analysis of these single-cell measurements, and does subsequent plotting/examination of the results from this analysis as well as identifying which individual image features are describing isoform-specific behaviours.
Folder 3 contains scripts that relates to the principal component analysis of the SNX2 mutant constructs to identify which residue changes result in similar localisation behaviours.

Overview of scripts/files
Folder 1: 01_ImageProcessing
	01_LoadOperettaImages_findfocus_filter_confluency_maxZ.ijm
	02_Create_Symlink.ipynb
	03_IlluminationCorrect_channels.ijm
	04_IlluminationCorrect_max_z.ijm
	05_Create_RGB_of_max_Zs.ijm
	06a_CellPose_20250226_NucleusModel
	06b_CellPose_20250226_CellbodyModel
	07_Ilastik_cell_classification_batch
	07a_IlastikModel_cell_classification
	08_CellProfiler_measurements_AllWells_ExperimentRepeat1
	09_Cell_filtering_and_transfection_calling

Folder 2: 02_Classifierbased_analysis_isoformlibrary
	01_Classifierbased_examination
	02_Classifierbased_examination_with_intensity_binning
	03_Results_from_classifierbased_analysis_without_binning
	04_Results_from_classifierbased_analysis_with_binning
	05_Identifying_features_describing_isoform_specific_behaviours

Folder 3:
	01_PCA_of_SNX2mutants


# More-detailed descriptions of scripts in Folder 1:
01_Image processing scripts. These scripts uses raw images generated by the PerkinElmer Operetta CLS microscope (according to the default filenaming system used by the microscope), and does the following.

'01_Image processing scripts' runs in ImageJ (>1.51) and creates a list of all images in an input directory and iteratively loads all images of a specified channel (use the channel that corresponds to the cell body stain) for a field-of-view (FOV), and then identifies the which slice in the stack corresponds to where the cell is in focus (using the Find_focused_slice plugin for imageJ). The name of the identified focus slice is recorded and written to a .txt. A subsetted max-Z of the channel and the channel corresponding to the nuclear stain is then generated and saved as .tifs. All images are then closed and the operation is repeated for the next FOV in the list of images. The script also removes images with no cells or completely covered in cells based on user-specified thresholds for how much of an image should be background/foreground.

'02_Create_Symlink.ipynb' runs in python (>3.8)/jupyter notebook and loads the .txt containing which images are in-focus (user-specified directory). It then creates .symlink files of the focus images into a new folder.

'03_IlluminationCorrect_channels.ijm' runs in ImageJ (>1.51) using the BaSIC plugin and loads all images from a user-defined directory (use the directory of the .symlinks of the focus images), iteratively for each of the four channels. For each channel, all images are used to first calculate illumination correction profiles (which are saved as .tifs) and then apply the corrections to the all the images. The illumination corrected focus images are then saved as .tifs.

'04_IlluminationCorrect_max_z.ijm' runs in ImageJ (>1.51) using the BaSIC plugin and loads all images from a user-defined directory (use the directory containing the max-Z subset .tifs of the cellbody and nuclear channels). It iteratively loads all images from a single channel alongside the illumination correction profiles for the same channel (calculated in '03_IlluminationCorrect_channels.ijm'), and then uses the pre-calculated correction profiles to illumination correct the maxZ images. The illumination corrected maxZ images are then saved as new .tifs.

'05_Create_RGB_of_max_Zs.ijm' runs in ImageJ (>1.51) and iteratively loads the images from two user-specified directories (that should correspond to the ones containing the corrected max-Z images of the nucleus and cell body), loading the images corresponding to the same FOV at the same time. These images are 16-bit grey scale. The images are initially scaled (using a manually determined scaling, based on observed staining intensity in the images. Has to be adjusted for each experiment) and then converted to 8-bit RGB, where the nucleus image will be red (R) and the cell body will be green (G).

'06a/06b' are CellPose models that are generated via transfer learning in CellPose 2 to improve performance on these images. They can be used to run CellPose via the command line to use the 8-bit RGB images of the nucleus and cell body to generate segmentation maps of the nucleus and cell body, respectively. (Each segmented object will have a unique pixel value). See the CellPose official website on how to run CellPose in the command line.

'07_Ilastik_cell_classification_batch' runs in python (>3.8) and uses Ilastik (>1.4). The script takes user-defined directories containing an ilastik model (the '07a_IlastikModel_cell_classification') that is trained to classify cells based on the 8-bit RGB image from '05_Create_RGB_of_max_Zs.ijm' and the cell body segmentation from '06' to classifier whether cells are interphase cells (used for downstream analysis) or mitotic/rounded cells (to be excluded). The cell outputs the classifications as a .png (where each class has a specific pixel value) that can be loaded alongside the cell segmentation maps to keep link cell classification to a specific cell.

'08_CellProfiler_measurements_AllWells_ExperimentRepeat1' runs in CellProfiler (>4.25) and is used to perform single-cell measurements on all the cells in the images. The script takes the corrected channel .tifs as inputs (drag-and-drop) alongside the cell body and nucleus segmentations (drag-and-drop) and the classifications (drag-and-drop). The program outputs .csvs that contain single object measurements describing the different channels (importantly the mCherry channel) in terms of intensity, signal distribution etc.), where each row corresponds to an object and each column is a measured feature. .csvs are generated for both the input segmentations (both cell body and nucleus) as well as the cytoplasm (cell body minus nucleus), and cell bodies where those touching the image border has been removed. 

"09_Cell_filtering_and_transfection_calling" is a .rmarkdown file that runs in R (>4.2) using various packages specified in the start of the script. It loads .csv files from a user-specified directory and is used to load the single cell measurements, then perform initial data clean-up to remove mitotic cells, non-mononucleated cells etc., and then enables plotting of the mCherry intensity levels within the different conditions. This is used to define mCherry values (specifically mean intensity and upper quartile intensities) that define transfected cells, whereby a user-defined transfection threshold can be inputted. This allows the script to assign transfection status to all cells that have cleared QC, and generate a new .csv as output. This .csv contains the cells that can be used for down-stream analysis.


# More-detailed descriptions of scripts in Folder 2:
"01_Classifierbased_examination" is an R script (R >4.2) that relies on various packages (listed at the start of the script). The script reads in the filtered, transfection assigned single-cell measurements generated by the last script in 'ImageProcessing' via a user-specified folder. The script then reduces the features for all cells to mCherry-related features and filters out high mCherry-intensity cells and to remove the cells with highest expression levels that also may be skewed between isoform pairs to be compared. The script then performs a pairwise-comparison of the two isoforms within each isoform pair using a classifier-based approach. Specifically, cells from a given isoform pair are initially down-sampled so an equal number of cells express either isoform A or isoform B in the pair (sampling done at the experimental repeat level), and after sampling are pooled to form a new dataset. This dataset is used as input for a feedforward neural net (nnet) classifier (where features with no or very little variance are dropped) which is then trained with 10-fold cross-validation on the data to correctly assign isoform identity to cells in the dataset. The average performance of the classifier across the hold-out folds is used as a metric for how well the isoforms can be distinguished using solely their localisation patterns and therefore describes isoform localisation differences. The classifier also assigns a weighting to which features are important for correctly assigning isoform identity. In parallel to the isoform-based classification, and internal normalisation classifier is trained (following the same principle as described above) which uses cells that have transfection status of non-transfected, but which come from the same wells as the transfected, isoform-expressing cells, which allows us to normalise classifier performance to how much classification simply is driven by well differences.
The process of sampling + classifier-based assessment repeated 50 times and the results for each isoform pair is written into a .csv, which is used for the down-stream examination of the results.
The last section of the script contains an out-of-sample testing of the approach where the classification model trained via the process above is applied to cells from an independent dataset.

"02_Classifierbased_examination_with_intensity_binning" is an R script (R >4.2) that relies on various packages (listed at the start of the script). The script reads in the filtered, transfection assigned single-cell measurements generated by the last script in 'ImageProcessing' via a user-specified folder. It has the same purpose and works similar to "01_Classifierbased_examination", except cells within an isoform pair are separated into intensity bins prior to classifier-based assessment. Three different binning approaches are included in the script although only approach 1 and 3 (which is later renamed 2) were used for the final analysis. The binning is used to examine the importance of isoform expression levels for classification.

"03_Results_from_classifierbased_analysis_without_binning" is an Rmarkdown script (R >4.2) that relies on various packages (listed at the start of the script). The script uses user-specified directories to read in the classifier results from "01" alongside additional metadata kept in a .xlsx that details the examined isoforms in terms of the splicing events. The script reads in the classifier results and uses a ceiling normalised metric to examine whether the classifiers are detecting isoform-specific differences. The differences are tested using a bootstrap confidence interval approach. The last part of the script performs linear regression between different types of imbalance between the isoforms within an isoform pair (intensity differences, and the degree to which cells come from a single experimental repeat instead of being more evenly contributed across repeats), which is plotted and statistically examined.

"04_Results_from_classifierbased_analysis_with_binning" is an Rmarkdown script (R >4.2) that relies on various packages (listed at the start of the script). The script uses user-specified directories to read in the classifier results from "01/02" alongside additional metadata kept in a .xlsx that details the examined isoforms in terms of the splicing events. The script is largely similar to "03_Results_from_classifierbased_analysis_without_binning" but is mainly to create a comparison between classifier behaviour in the full cell dataset compared to the intensity binned datasets, plotted as a heatmap.

"05_Identifying_features_describing_isoform_specific_behaviours" is an Rmarkdown script (R >4.2) that relies on various packages (listed at the start of the script). The script uses user-specified directories to read in the classifier results from "01" alongside additional metadata kept in a .xlsx that details the examined isoforms in terms of the splicing events. The script uses the variable importance that is assigned to all variables during each iteration of classification and uses those to identify which features are capturing isoform-distinguishing behaviours. The script plots these for single isoform pairs that are the best performing in terms of the classifiers identifying differences between the isoforms.

# More-detailed descriptions of scripts in Folder 3:
"01_PCA_of_SNX2mutants" is an Rmarkdown script (R >4.2) that relies on various packages (listed at the start of the script). It is written to perform principal component analysis (PCA) on the single cell measurements obtained upon analysis of the imaging data from the SNX2 mutants (using the scripts in Folder 1). The script takes user-defined inputs to specify the directories where the single-cell measurements of the SNX2 mutants are. Additionally, it also reads in the classifier results (obtained using the scripts in Folder 2) to use the isoform-distinguishing features for the SNX2 isoforms as input so the PCA isn't performed on features not capturing isoform-specific behaviours.
The script plots the PCA clusters alongside a biplot and scree plot to provide insights into the observed clusters. The last part of the script creates lineplots of the key variable that separates the SNX2 mutants (mCherry granularity 2) versus the mCherry intensity to observe intensity-related behaviours. 